feat(docs): run sequencer new (#16745)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/versioned_docs/version-v1.2.0/the_aztec_network/guides/run_nodes/how_to_run_sequencer_new.md

Reviewer: is there  a reason this file has the `_new` suffix? why not edit the `docs/versioned_docs/version-v1.2.0/the_aztec_network/guides/run_nodes/how_to_run_sequencer.md`?

Reviewer: Also, this is only an update to the existing testnet? Should this page also go into `docs/docs`?

Author: Hmm I figured the diff would be easier to read, then I'll replace into the right places, but should have made that more clear in retrospect ! 😄

Now that everyone has seen it though I think I can make the structure proper !

---
sidebar_position: 2
title: How to Run a Sequencer Node
description: A comprehensive guide to setting up and running an Aztec Sequencer node on testnet, including infrastructure requirements, configuration options, and troubleshooting tips.
keywords:
  [
    aztec,
    sequencer,
    node,
    blockchain,
    L2,
    scaling,
    ethereum,
    validator,
    setup,
    tutorial,
  ]
tags:
  - sequencer
  - node
  - tutorial
  - infrastructure
---

This guide will go over the steps required to run a sequencer node on Aztec. It will also provide context to ensure users are comfortable with the steps they are taking.

The Aztec sequencer node is critical infrastructure responsible for ordering transactions and producing blocks.

The sequencer node takes part in three key actions:

1. Assemble unprocessed transactions and propose the next block
2. Attest to correct execution of txs in the proposed block (if part of validator committee)
3. Submit the successfully attested block to L1

> When transactions are sent to the Aztec network, sequencer nodes bundles them into blocks, checking various constraints such as gas limits, block size, and transaction validity. Before a block can be published, it must be validated by a committee of other sequencer nodes (validators in this context) who re-execute public transactions and verify private function proofs so they can attest to correct execution. These validators attest to the block's validity by signing it, and once enough attestations are collected (two-thirds of the committee plus one), the sequencer can submit the block to L1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When transactions are sent to the Aztec network, sequencer nodes bundles them into blocks, checking various constraints such as gas limits, block size, and transaction validity. Before a block can be published, it must be validated by a committee of other sequencer nodes (validators in this context) who re-execute public transactions and verify private function proofs so they can attest to correct execution. These validators attest to the block's validity by signing the block header, and once enough attestations are collected (two-thirds of the committee plus one), the sequencer can submit the block to L1.
```

An example keystore file is below. Copy this file and save it as `keystore.json` into your `aztec-sequencer/keys` folder.

```JSON
{
	schemaVersion: 1,
	validators: [
    {
      attester: ["ETH_PRIVATE_KEY_0"]
      publisher: ["ETH_PRIVATE_KEY_1"],
      coinbase: "ETH_ADDRESS_2",
      feeRecipient: "AZTEC_ADDRESS_0"
    }
  ]
}
```

The keystore defines a few important keys and addresses for sequencer operation. They include but are not limited to:

- `attester`: the private key of the sequencer, used for signing block proposals and attestations on block proposals produced by other sequencers. The corresponding Ethereum address of the private key is the identity of the sequencer.
- `publisher`: the private key of the Ethereum EOA used for sending the block proposal to L1. This defaults to the attester private key if not set.
- `coinbase`: the Ethereum address set in a block proposal. L1 rewards and fees are sent to this address. This falls back to the address derived by the attester private key if not set.

> - `feeRecipient`: the Aztec Address of the fee recipient address when proposing blocks. Allows receiving  funds as the block proposer in L2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `feeRecipient`: the Aztec Address of the fee recipient address when proposing blocks. The unburnt portion of the tx fees in a given block are sent to this address.
```

Please set these values with the ones you want and save `keystore.json`.

### Set required node configuration

Next you will need to define some environment variables that set important configuration for your node.

These include:

- `DATA_DIRECTORY`: the folder where the data of the sequencer is stored

> - `KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY`: the folder containing the `keystore.json` file created above

Reviewer 2: If a file is provided, loads a single keystore. If a directory is provided, loads all keystore files within that directory.

Author: Have added some more text on this, wdyt ?

- `LOG_LEVEL`: the desired level of logging for the sequencer. It defaults to info.
- `ETHEREUM_HOSTS`: The execution RPC endpoints
- `L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS`: The consensus RPC endpoints
- `P2P_IP`: The IP address of this sequencer

Please paste this sample `.env` file into the empty one currently residing in your `aztec-sequencer` folder. Please note that we are assuming you are using the default ports of 8080 for the sequencer itself, and 40400 for p2p connectivity. If this is not the case, please overwrite the defaults below.

```sh
DATA_DIRECTORY=./data
KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY=./keys
LOG_LEVEL=info
ETHEREUM_HOSTS=<your L1 execution endpoint, or a comma separated list if you have multiple>
L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS=<your L1 consensus endpoint, or a comma separated list if you have multiple>
AZTEC_NODE_RPC_PORT=8080

> AZTEC_NODE_P2P_PORT=40400

Reviewer 2: Both of those variables would only set the ports on the docker but not on the sequencer. It's not clear what to do (i.e. which variables to use to configure your node to use different ports

Author: Ah that's fair, I have restructured the env vars a bit to make this clearer !

```

### Ensure auto-update / auto-restart is enabled

It is imperative that the built in auto-updating functionality of the sequencer is not disabled. The update-checker is a background module in the Aztec node that enables global coordination of updates. It allows the protocol team to:

- Push configuration changes to all nodes
- Trigger shutdowns so that nodes can pull the latest image version
- Apply hotfixes quickly
- Coordinate node resets after a governance upgrade, especially when a new canonical rollup is published to the Registry

This module ensures that upgrades and fixes propagate smoothly without requiring manual intervention from every node operator.

Please ensure environment variables:

`AUTO_UPDATE_URL` remains unset, and

> add `AUTO_UPDATE=config-and-version` to your `.env` file.

Reviewer 2: I think we should instead ask them to keep the defaults (which are `config-and-version` and the actual s3 bucket where we host the json file). 

For mainnet, these will be disabled by default, so we can just recommend them to not set them and use the default values for testnet. When Mainnet is around, we can recommend they override the defaults.

Author: Fair point. Addressed !

> Because docker-compose does not respect pull policies on container restarts, to handle updates properly, add Watchtower to your stack by running:

Reviewer 2: Is this true? I didn't know that

Author: Yessir ! Me neither until writing this 🙇

```sh
docker run -d \
  --name watchtower \
  -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \

>   containrrr/watchtower

Reviewer 2: is this a typo?

Author: This also got a double take from me as well, but yeah this is straight from watchtower docs 😄

```

### Applying your Docker compose file

Now that you have done all the setup, create a Docker compose file named `compose.yml` in your `aztec-sequencer` directory and paste the below code into it.

```yaml
services:
 aztec-sequencer:
  image: "aztecprotocol/aztec:1.2.1"
  container_name: "aztec-sequencer"
  ports:
   - ${AZTEC_NODE_RPC_PORT}$:8080
   - ${AZTEC_NODE_P2P_PORT}$:40400
   - ${AZTEC_NODE_P2P_PORT}$:40400/udp
  volumes:
   - ${DATA_DIRECTORY}:/var/lib/data
   - ${KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY}:/var/lib/keystore
  environment:
   KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY: /var/lib/keystore
   DATA_DIRECTORY: /var/lib/data
   LOG_LEVEL: ${LOG_LEVEL}
   ETHEREUM_HOSTS: ${ETHEREUM_HOSTS}
   L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS: ${L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS}
   P2P_IP: ${P2P_IP}
  entrypoint: node /usr/src/yarn-project/aztec/dest/bin/index.js
  command: >-
   start

>    --network testnet-ignition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
--network alpha-testnet
```

---
sidebar_position: 2
title: How to Run a Sequencer Node
description: A comprehensive guide to setting up and running an Aztec Sequencer node on testnet, including infrastructure requirements, configuration options, and troubleshooting tips.
keywords:
  [
    aztec,
    sequencer,
    node,
    blockchain,
    L2,
    scaling,
    ethereum,
    validator,
    setup,
    tutorial,
  ]
tags:
  - sequencer
  - node
  - tutorial
  - infrastructure
---

This guide will go over the steps required to run a sequencer node on Aztec. It will also provide context to ensure users are comfortable with the steps they are taking.

The Aztec sequencer node is critical infrastructure responsible for ordering transactions and producing blocks.

The sequencer node takes part in three key actions:

1. Assemble unprocessed transactions and propose the next block
2. Attest to correct execution of txs in the proposed block (if part of validator committee)
3. Submit the successfully attested block to L1

> When transactions are sent to the Aztec network, sequencer nodes bundles them into blocks, checking various constraints such as gas limits, block size, and transaction validity. Before a block can be published, it must be validated by a committee of other sequencer nodes (validators in this context) who re-execute public transactions and verify private function proofs so they can attest to correct execution. These validators attest to the block's validity by signing the block header, and once enough attestations are collected (two-thirds of the committee plus one), the sequencer can submit the block to L1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When transactions are sent to the Aztec network, sequencer nodes bundle them into blocks, checking various constraints such as gas limits, block size, and transaction validity. Before a block can be published, it must be validated by a committee of other sequencer nodes (validators in this context) who re-execute public transactions and verify private function proofs so they can attest to correct execution. These validators attest to the block's validity by signing the block header, and once enough attestations are collected (two-thirds of the committee plus one), the sequencer can submit the block to L1.
```

The archiver component complements this process by maintaining historical chain data. It continuously monitors L1 for new blocks, processes them, and maintains a synchronized view of the chain state. This includes managing contract data, transaction logs, and L1-to-L2 messages, making it essential for network synchronization and data availability.

## Prerequisites

Minimum hardware requirements:

- 2 core / 4 vCPU
- 16 GB RAM
- 1TB NVMe SSD
- 25 Mbps network connection

Please note that these requirements are subject to change as the network throughput increases.

This guide expects you to be using a "standard" Linux distribution like Debian / Ubuntu when following along with the steps.

It also is assumed that you have installed Docker and the aztec toolchain via aztec-up as described in the [getting started section](../../index.md).

Furthermore, as this guide uses Docker compose, you will need to install it. Please follow [this](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) guide to do so.

> Finally, this guide requires you to have endpoints of an L1 node stack of an execution and consensus client. If you do not have one set up, you see a good guide on how to do that here at (Eth Docker)[https://ethdocker.com/Usage/QuickStart].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, this guide requires you to have endpoints of an L1 node stack of an execution and consensus client. If you do not have one set up, you can see a good guide on how to do that [here at Eth Docker](https://ethdocker.com/Usage/QuickStart).
```

## Configure the sequencer

> There are a few important things to note when setting up a sequencer. This guide will guide you in up and running a sequencer with a standard setup using Docker compose with a .env file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few important things to note when setting up a sequencer. This guide will guide you in setting up and running a sequencer with a standard setup using Docker compose with a .env file.
```

The setup of the sequencer has four important steps.

1. Define private keys / accounts used for sequencer duties
2. Set required node configuration
3. Ensure auto-update / auto-restart is enabled
4. Apply your Docker compose file

> Let's start by creating a new directory called `aztec-sequencer`, with two subdirectories, `keys`, and `data. This is where all the information used by the sequencer will be stored. Please also create an empty `.env` file in `aztec-sequencer` to define your settings before moving on to the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start by creating a new directory called `aztec-sequencer`, with two subdirectories, `keys`, and `data`. This is where all the information used by the sequencer will be stored. Please also create an empty `.env` file in `aztec-sequencer` to define your settings before moving on to the next step.
```

> ### Define private keys / accounts used for sequencer duties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Define private keys / accounts
```
More succinct headings is cleaner

> Due to the duties performed by the sequencer, it must hold and use private keys identifying it as a valid proposer or attester. The way this is done is by defining a keystore file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sequencer must hold and use private keys identifying it as a valid proposer or attester. This is done is by defining a keystore file.
```

```JSON
{
	schemaVersion: 1,
	validators: [
    {
      attester: ["ETH_PRIVATE_KEY_0"]
      publisher: ["ETH_PRIVATE_KEY_1"],
      coinbase: "ETH_ADDRESS_2",
      feeRecipient: "AZTEC_ADDRESS_0"
    }
  ]
}
```

The keystore defines a few important keys and addresses for sequencer operation. They include but are not limited to:

- `attester`: the private key of the sequencer, used for signing block proposals and attestations on block proposals produced by other sequencers. The corresponding Ethereum address of the private key is the identity of the sequencer.
- `publisher`: the private key of the Ethereum EOA used for sending the block proposal to L1. This defaults to the attester private key if not set.
- `coinbase`: the Ethereum address set in a block proposal. L1 rewards and fees are sent to this address. This falls back to the address derived by the attester private key if not set.
- `feeRecipient`: the Aztec Address of the fee recipient address when proposing blocks. The unburnt portion of the tx fees in a given block are sent to this address.

Please set these values with the ones you want and save `keystore.json`.

> ### Set required node configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Node configuration
```

Next you will need to define some environment variables that set important configuration for your node.

These include:

- `DATA_DIRECTORY`: the folder where the data of the sequencer is stored
- `KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY`: can be a path to the file or directory where keystores are located. In our case it is the path to the folder containing the `keystore.json` file created above

> - `LOG_LEVEL`: the desired level of logging for the sequencer. It defaults to info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `LOG_LEVEL`: the desired level of logging for the sequencer. It defaults to `INFO`.
```

- `ETHEREUM_HOSTS`: The execution RPC endpoints
- `L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS`: The consensus RPC endpoints
- `P2P_IP`: The IP address of this sequencer
- `P2P_PORT`: The port that P2P communication happens on
- `AZTEC_PORT`: The port that the sequencer node API is exposed on

Please paste this sample `.env` file into the empty one currently residing in your `aztec-sequencer` folder. Please note that we are assuming you are using the default ports of 8080 for the sequencer itself, and 40400 for p2p connectivity. If this is not the case, please overwrite the defaults below.

```sh
DATA_DIRECTORY=./data
KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY=./keys
LOG_LEVEL=info
ETHEREUM_HOSTS=<your L1 execution endpoint, or a comma separated list if you have multiple>
L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS=<your L1 consensus endpoint, or a comma separated list if you have multiple>
P2P_IP=<your external IP address>
P2P_PORT=40400
AZTEC_PORT=8080
```

:::tip
You MUST forward your ports. Your router must send UDP and TCP traffic on the port specified by `AZTEC_NODE_P2P_PORT` to your IP address on your local network.

> If you are unable to determine your public ip. Running the command `curl ipv4.icanhazip.com` can retrieve it for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the command `curl ipv4.icanhazip.com` can retrieve your public IP address for you.
```

:::

> ### Ensure auto-update / auto-restart is enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable auto-update / auto-restart
```

It is imperative that the built in auto-updating functionality of the sequencer is not disabled. The update-checker is a background module in the Aztec node that enables global coordination of updates. It allows the protocol team to:

- Push configuration changes to all nodes
- Trigger shutdowns so that nodes can pull the latest image version

> - Apply hotfixes quickly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply hot-fixes quickly
```

services:
 aztec-sequencer:
  image: "aztecprotocol/aztec:1.2.1"
  container_name: "aztec-sequencer"
  ports:
    - ${AZTEC_PORT}:${AZTEC_PORT}
    - ${P2P_PORT}:${P2P_PORT}
    - ${P2P_PORT}:${P2P_PORT}/udp
  volumes:
    - ${DATA_DIRECTORY}:/var/lib/data
    - ${KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY}:/var/lib/keystore
  environment:
    KEY_STORE_DIRECTORY: /var/lib/keystore
    DATA_DIRECTORY: /var/lib/data
    LOG_LEVEL: ${LOG_LEVEL}
    ETHEREUM_HOSTS: ${ETHEREUM_HOSTS}
    L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS: ${L1_CONSENSUS_HOST_URLS}
    P2P_IP: ${P2P_IP}
    P2P_PORT: ${P2P_PORT}
    AZTEC_PORT: ${AZTEC_PORT}
  entrypoint: node /usr/src/yarn-project/aztec/dest/bin/index.js
  command: >-
    start
    --network alpha-testnet
    --node
    --archiver
    --sequencer
  networks:
   - aztec
  restart: always

networks:
 aztec:
  name: aztec
```

Please note that we are setting only the necessary configuration for running this sequencer. The full list of settings and flags can be explored here at the [cli reference](../../reference/cli_reference.md). A lot of these options are preset to defaults by the `--network` flag above. This downloads defaults for the specified network and applies them to the node.

> Now, you can run `docker compose up` inside your `aztec-sequencer` folder to start the sequencer !

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can run `docker compose up` inside your `aztec-sequencer` folder to start the sequencer!
```

> To check if it is currently synced, which may take a few minutes, run this command and compare its output to any of the Aztec block explorers.

Reviewer: Add a link to the explorers to make it easy to check.

Author: Addressed !

```sh
curl -s -X POST -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"node_getL2Tips","params":[],"id":67}' \
http://localhost:8080 | jq -r ".result.proven.number"
```

## Add yourself to the testnet sequencer set

> After setting up your node, to be included in testnet duties, you must explicitly request to be added to the sequencer set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up your node you must explicitly request to be added to the sequencer set.
```

To complete this final step you have two options:

> You can either head to (testnet.aztec.network)[testnet.aztec.network] and complete an onboarding flow utilizing zkPassport, or you can complete the validator form provided by Aztec manually found (here)[deadlink].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can either head to [testnet.aztec.network](testnet.aztec.network) and complete an onboarding flow utilizing zkPassport, or you can complete the validator form provided by Aztec manually found [here](deadlink).
```
square brackets come before parenthesis for markdown links. 

also fix `deadlink`

Author: Thanks for the headsup, have actually talked w/ Koen and have validated that we don't need the manual flow for now (it was previously up in the air as an option to give)! Have fixed this !
